SLIDE 1 TITLE
Hello everyone,
Here with me I have a teaspoon, which will be essential for today. 
I’m Alessia, I’m 23, and I’m a student, just like most of you, and I’d like to play a game, okay? I need everyone’s participation: so, firstly, I want to know if you can hear me well,ok? If you hear me well, you have to shout a word all together. The word you have to shout is “together”. So, I will say a sentence, and then you have to complete it with the word “together”. I want you to shout it, ok? That’s our game. Let’s try, let’s give it a try.
“We can go on only if we stay…”
 “Together”
You’ve just exemplified this:
SLIDE 2
This was discovered right here at Sapienza University by a research group I was following in one of the laboratories, and this study can be explained exactly like this: it is together that we can move forward, or -if you prefer another language- “on ne peut avancer qu’on restant ensemble”, or also “wir können nur weitermachen, wenn wir zusammen bleiben”, or maybe better “a gente só pode ir pra frente se a gente tiver junto”, or, alternatively, “si può andare avanti solo se si resta insieme”.
We could say it in every language of the world: when we are together, we can move forward, we survive longer. The white column tells us that mice that lived together survived longer, and if they got sick of this type of brain tumor -a glioma-, the tumor grew more slowly.
Around four years ago I was at the beginning of my Medical course at university and this laboratory experience left me astonished. I treasured the results that this team shared with me, and three months later, when I found myself doing cancer research at Sorbonne, in Paris… I got into something like this:
SLIDE 3
Audio vittoria
In Paris, I attended as many events as possible: I had realized that being with others was essential, and I wanted to be with others.
…But at some point, my certainties crumbled.
Audio riser
I had spent my whole life learning about various world cultures and the languages we heard earlier -as a polyglot I love languages!-, and one day I realized I was missing the most important language—the emotional language.
We spend an entire lifetime meeting people, but we often miss the most important encounter—the one with ourselves. Isn't that a paradox?
I had this revelation one day in Germany, during an international exchange program, when a professor entered the classroom and said:
“If everyone truly knew themselves, there would be no more wars in the world.”
I didn’t believe a single word of what he said.
He was a Psychotherapy and Psychiatry professor in the medical course, and I had arrived in Germany with a world of prejudices about psychotherapy, labeling it as something "for serious problems".
But that professor and the clinical internship made me understand that psychotherapy is for everyone—to explore one’s emotions, to deal with anxiety, dysfunctional stories, but also to truly know oneself and, also in doing so, maybe prevent the headlines of violence, murders, and wars.
How many times have you dirtied a teaspoon and left it in the sink, saying, "I'll wash it later"?
Maybe hours later, you found yourself in this situation:
SLIDE 4
Audio sconfitta
Imagine this: you finally decide to wash the dishes, but to your disappointment, you discover that… the water taps are faulty!
Mom or Dad was supposed to fix them, right? But maybe they didn’t, and now it’s up to you to go and buy new ones! But everything feels so complicated, so you decide to put it off, and in the meantime, if your phone rings, you snap at someone who has nothing to do with it!
We get it: this is now officially a "bad" day.
But this story isn’t about teaspoons or broken sinks—it’s about our emotions, which pile up like dirty dishes, and about our relationships with others.
It’s so easy to say that moving forward together is the key.
But how do we learn to be together?
It all starts with a simple "hello”, a powerful tool—psychotherapist Eric Berne even wrote a book about it!
 "What do you say after you say Hello?"
According to Berne, "hello" is the fundamental unit of recognition.
When I say "hello" to you, I’m implicitly saying:
“I see you, I acknowledge you, you are here!”
And if I never say it, over time —you might start feeling invisible.
And then? After a "hello," things can always go wrong.
Have you ever been interested in someone who was not into you? Maybe you chased them while they rejected you.
Did you ever stop and ask yourself:
Was I fighting for love, or just to ‘win’?
Was I trying to escape the shame of rejection?
Or, have you ever heard of people who simply can’t live without their partner?
So, they create an all-consuming relationship, one that engulfs the other person, where breaking up feels impossible to accept, because if the other person is like an extension of your own body, then the breakup would feel like ‘amputating an arm,’ leaving you feeling like you’re dying—due to an emptiness that might actually symbolize a deeper lack from childhood.
There’s so much behind our behaviors.
And many of them are deeply connected to our relationship with our parents.
Let’s find out more.
SLIDE 5
The 1969[a][b], John Hopkins University, Baltimore: Researchers decided to investigate how human bonds are formed, starting with the mother-child relationship. Now we know that everything is much more complex than this, and this Mary Ainsworth’s Theory is just one of the many that we have: we must always keep in mind that every person is a whole universe of fascinating stories and experiences, but let’s dive into this experiment, that was among the first ones about attachment.
Imagine a room with a mother and her baby.
How would the child react if the mother left?
It was discovered that there were always four possible behavioral patterns:
1. Secure attachment: The mother leaves, so the child cries, but then welcomes her back with a hug when she returns.
2. Anxious attachment: The child cries a lot and continues crying even after the mother returns.
3. Avoidant attachment: When the mother returns, the child doesn’t want her.
4. Disorganized attachment: The child appears confused when the mother comes back.
These four patterns could indirectly shape in some ways, according to those researchers, how we will behave in a relationship: secure, anxious, avoidant, or disorganized.[c][d][e]
So much of this could come from our parents—they are the first people we see loving (or not loving), and they are the ones from whom we receive our survival manual.
Their presence (or absence) tells us so much about who we are.
That’s why, in the psychiatric clinic in Germany, we used to ask patients seemingly odd questions like:
* "Do you feel hungrier for your mom or your dad?"
* "Are you the eldest or youngest child?"
* "Did your parents knock before entering your room at home?"
But our life with others and with ourselves isn’t just about teaspoons and water taps.
Believe it or not, even the company that made the sink matters.
What does that mean?
What we experience is even influenced transgenerationally—it is passed down from one generation to the next.
2013: A fascinating study showed that mice that approached and smelled fruit while being exposed to electric shocks developed a fear of the fruit and stopped going near it.
Makes sense, right?
But here’s what the research team discovered: even the offspring of these mice exhibited the same behavior.
And so did their grandchildren!
Even though each generation had been separated from the previous one at the moment of birth to prevent any form of communication, the fear still persisted.
This is known as “transgenerational experiences”—as if traumas could be passed down from one generation to the next, and in the case of mice this was true, because of epigenetic modifications.
So who am I, then?
Am I unconsciously following a script written by someone in my family? Do my fears or some dysfunctional patterns come from them? And how can I break free from all this and be my true “me”?
Psychotherapy also helps free us from what does not belong to us, to break the chain of a generation, to become the true owner of our own life.
And it helps us understand that emotions send us signals—fear and all other feelings are important, and they exist.
Beware of those who say, “It’s all in your head!”
Try telling someone with a broken ankle, “It’s all in your ankle!”
If we feel emotions, it means they exist—and they are often reactions to something happening or survival strategies.
We have both the right and the duty—to avoid ruining our lives and those of others—to take care of them, to notice them, and not to judge them, because every emotion has a meaning and a cause.
Nothing is “senseless.”
In the clinic in Germany, there was a guy who used to shout, “I am the son of God,” “I am the son of God.”
And only after deep exploration of his past did we understand what he really meant:
His biological father had abandoned him, his adoptive father had abused him, and he had come to believe that the only father he could belong to and, at the same time, feel safe with was God.
It all made sense—this was his way of surviving.
This is why it is so important not to judge others because we don’t know what is happening (or what has happened) in their lives.
Wouldn’t we all feel a little better if we took better care of our emotions and self-awareness?
What if all of this were actually taught in schools?
Often, we only take care of our physical health, but not our mental health.
And we have proof of this:
Just before the last century, humanity saw an extraordinary increase in life expectancy, which rose from 40 to 70 years.
And all of this happened simply because of:
* Mass vaccinations (public initiative)
* Handwashing (individual initiative)
So isn’t it time to start washing our emotional teaspoons?
For this, we need both public and individual initiatives:
* Public initiatives:

   * Providing free psychological services, just like a general practitioner—as is already done in Germany
   * Introducing emotional education in schools at every level
For months, I’ve been thinking deeply about emotional education. I knew we needed a change, but how could I actually take action? I began giving talks in schools about emotions and respecting boundaries, and then, unexpectedly, I was selected to coordinate the European Student Assembly 2025, which meets (slide?) at the European Parliament in Strasbourg. This is the official assembly of European students who want to be changemakers. I’m currently a Coordinator for a panel on Mental Health, representing my university at the Assembly. There, international students from all over Europe come together to draft policy recommendations to be shared with parliamentarians — and, eventually, with society as a whole. It’s been amazing … but it’s not enough. Not just Europe, not just one hemisphere, but the entire world must become more aware of how important it is to pay attention to emotions. And we don’t just need to talk about it in parliaments — it’s essential that each one of us takes action.[f]
That’s why also individual initiatives are essential:

   * Everyone should truly know themselves and metaphorically stand in front of the mirror and say: "Hello, I see you, I acknowledge your existence” and remind ourselves: "With you, I can move forward," or “Avec toi, moi je peux avancer,” or in any other language.
Because we don’t need anything or anyone to complete us.
Any human interaction -with a friend, a partner, or a stranger- is about understanding and respecting other people’s boundaries, and every relationship is about co-living, not living through the other person.
And we all have the ability to take our lives into our own hands … just like a teaspoon!




SLIDE 1
Diving into the world without first exploring your own? A journey into emotional education.


SLIDE 2
“Enriched environment reduces glioma growth through immune and non-immune mechanisms in mice” (2015) by S. Garofalo, C. Limatola et al.


SLIDE 3
Foto Parigi


SLIDE 4
Foto piatti sporchi


SLIDE 5
1. Attachment: notice your emotions
“Patterns of attachment: A psychological study of the strange situation” (1979) by M. D. S. Ainsworth et al.
2. Transgenerational experiences: are we following a script? 
“Parental olfactory experience influences behavior and neuronal structure in subsequent generations” (2013, Nature Neuroscience) by B. G. Dias and K. J. Ressler
3. Washing "emotional teaspoons" 
“Life expectancy in the world” - https://statisticsanddata.org/data/average-life-expectancy-1543-2019/#google_vignette




[a]Qui ti riferisci ad un libro o all'Università in cui è stata condotta la ricerca?
[b]Uni, come dire: 2025, Roma. Il team sta revisionando lo speech hahah
[c]Forse meglio dire che potrebbero influenzare i rapporti inter relazionali, non specificamente il modo in cui ameremo il partner
[d]specificato con "could indirectly - in some ways - behave with"
[e]Dato che non menzioniamo i partner in altri punti dello speech, meglio rimanere più generici qui (anche perché lo stile di attaccamento influisce tu tutti i tipi di relazioni, non solo amorose).
[f]Noi terremmo le parti in arancione. Sintetizziamole il più possibile per rimanere nel minutaggio previsto